That was a lot of content on graphql
and as I mentioned, you could fill an entire course just on graphql
and indeed there are courses on it. The official docs on graphql.org are a great place to dive
deeper because they're really good
and there you can learn more about all the features graphql offers, including its more advanced features.
In this introductory module,
I hopefully gave you a good overview over the graphql core concepts and how you build a graphql
API with node
and in this case, with the expressjs framework. You learned that graphql allows you or is a technique
to build a stateless client independent API, just as we did it with the rest API but that it offers a higher
flexibility than the rest APIs typically do because you expose a custom query language to your client.
A graphql API is made up of queries which you would compare to your get requests in rest
APIs. Mutations, that would be your post, put, patch and delete requests in rest APIs and possibly
all subscriptions,
something I didn't cover in this module.
You use these constructs to exchange data and to manage data
and the important and characteristic thing about graphql APIs is that
they only expose one endpoint to the client and that is a post request to /graphql
typically, it has to be a post request though, that is something you can't avoid
and all requests are directed there and then in the request body of that post request, you use the graphql
query language to describe the query you want to execute
or the mutation you want to execute. The server parses that incoming query expression and then calls
the appropriate resolvers to execute the logic you wrote and return the appropriate data
or do the appropriate manipulation. Graphql and that is also important is of course not limited to reactjs
frontend applications,
you can use it with any frontend application, be that a mobile app, a single page app with any framework
or whatever you have,
it's not limited to react.
Now when we compare it to rest, then we have to understand that rest APIs are not strictly worse,
they might still be the perfect solution for your next project.
They are especially great for static data requirements so where you don't need that additional flexibility
and then you have a very clearly structured and explicit way of defining your endpoints and defining
the possibilities
your API offers. So for file uploads or scenarios where you simply don't need that flexibility because
you always get the same kind of data,
there rest APIs might still be the perfect solution. In other scenarios, graphql might be better
because you get a higher flexibility due to that exposed full query language your client can use
and I also want to highlight that both rest and graphql APIs can be implemented with any framework
and actually even with any server side language. You are not limited to
nodejs and on
nodejs,
you are of course not limited to express and that is really important.
The core concepts you learned here and a lot of the logic you applied will actually be the same no matter
which framework you use or no matter which server side language you use.